README.md, before:

## How to use the manuscript template?

- Click on the "Use this template" button
- Add a `ACCESS_TOKEN` secrets to your repo.
- Go to `http://you.github.io/repo-name/` to view the html version, PDF, LaTeX source, and Word document
- Edit this README
- Edit the `metadata.json` file
- Edit the `manuscript.md` file

## Downloads

[master_pdf]: https://clementviolet.github.io/manuscript-template/manuscript-template.pdf
[master_tex]: https://clementviolet.github.io/manuscript-template/manuscript-template.tex
[master_doc]: https://clementviolet.github.io/manuscript-template/manuscript-template.docx
[master_html]: https://clementviolet.github.io/manuscript-template/index.html

**Please note** that the preferred version is the HTML, on which you can make comments using [hypothes.is](https://hypothes.is/). Otherwise, you can create a branch or event make some comment in the file of your choice.

|                 |                                |            HTML            |             TeX            |             PDF            |        Word document        |
|-----------------|--------------------------------|:--------------------------:|:--------------------------:|:--------------------------:|:---------------------------:|
| `master` (main) | ![Create the document](https://github.com/clementviolet/manuscript-template/workflows/Create%20the%20document/badge.svg) | [:blue_book:][master_html] | [:notebook:][master_tex] | [:green_book:][master_pdf] | [:orange_book:][master_doc] |

Commit message:

Switch template for MDPreprint template 📝

README.md, after:

<p align="center">
  <b>A template for easily creating pretty, nicely formatted preprints in LaTeX from a Markdown document.</b>
</p>

# Features

With simple options you can enable/disable:
- `bioRxiv`, `medRxiv`, `arXiv` and `chemRxiv` logos.
- `blue` or `red` colour schemes
- Figures at the end
- Line numbers
- Change line spacing

See more in the [wiki](https://github.com/roaldarbol/LaPreprint/wiki).

# Quick start

1. Click `Use this template`
2. Open the document in your preferred text editor
3. Edit `metadata.json` to have the correct information
4. Start writing! The sections are found in the `chapter` and `supplementary` folders

If you want different sections you can easily rename them.

# Acknowledgements

Mdpreprint is based on LaPreprint which is inspired by the style of eLife and PLoS, and is based on the eLife template. Additionally, the fancy footer is modified from the [the Henriques Lab template](https://www.overleaf.com/latex/templates/henriqueslab-biorxiv-template/nyprsybwffws). Without all their work, this template wouldn't exist!
