
# Results

Both MCMC convergence and effective sample size of the different *jSDMs* were satisfactory (see Appendix D).

## Model Fit & Predictive power

### Species level

Presence/absence models showed excellent explanatory power with mean AUCs above 0.9 on the train dataset, but lower predictive power with mean AUCs around 0.66 on the test set (Fig. S17). Both explanatory (mean AUC between 0.92 and 0.93) and predictive (mean AUC between 0.64 and 0.66) power were overall similar across models (@fig:chapt1fig2, Fig. S17). Within the target species assemblage, predictions improved for 41 species and worsened for 36 species (out of the 99 target species, which implies marginal changes for the remaining 22) in the *WhC* model relative to the benchmark. In comparison in the *Ph* or the *TrPh* models, predictions only improved for 26 and 27 species, respectively, and worsened for 49 and 48 species, respectively.

Abundance models also showed a satisfactory explanatory power with a mean RMSE close to nine for all models, given a mean abundance in the train dataset of 307.31 ± 583.58 (mean ± sd). Overall, all models underpredicted species abundances (Fig. S18-19). While explanatory power was similar across models, larger variations were observed for predictive power. The *Bench* model had a mean RMSE of 126.67 (for a mean abundance in the test dataset of 700.57 ± 818.66; Fig S17). The Ph model performed better (mean RMSE of 62.23; -50.87% compared to the *Bench*; Fig. S17) whereas the *TrPh* model did worse (mean RMSE of 139.21; +9.90%; Fig. S17). The best model was the *WhC* with a mean RMSE of 6.59 (-94.80% compared to the *Bench*, Fig. S17). Out of the 99 target species, the *WhC* model predictions improved for 57 species but declined for 15 species relative to the Bench. Conversely, performance gain for the *Ph* and *TrPh* models were poor relative to the Bench, as predictions improved for 38 and 31 species, respectively, but declined for 40 and 46 species, respectively.

We further investigated this gain in predictive power of the *WhC* model fitted to abundance data by examining the relationships between changes in predictive power and the occurrence or abundance of the species. On the test set, performance of the *WhC* model most improved relative to the *Bench* model for rare species (correlation with average species abundance: Kendall’s $\tau = 0.12$, $\text{p-value} < 0.05$; Fig. S20). However, we found no patterns between change in RMSE relative to the Bench model and proportion of presence (Kendall’s $τ\tau = 0.12$, $\text{p-value} = 0.09$; Fig S21).

![Change in explanatory and predictive power of three model structures (yellow for *Phylogeny* (*Ph*), red for *Traits and phylogeny* (*TrPh*), and green for *Whole community* (*WhC*) models) relative to the *Benchmark model* (*Bench*; purple). Changes are expressed as percentages relative to the benchmark fitted on presence/absence (top row) or abundance (bottom row) data. Points above the zero line indicate performance gain.](figures/fig2.png){#fig:chapt1fig2}

### Community level

In terms of alpha diversity, the *Bench*, the *Ph* and *TrPh* models fitted on abundance data all underpredicted mean species richness of the train set by 4 species on average (-29.2% compared to observed data; @fig:chapt1fig3). In contrast, the *WhC* model overpredicted mean richness by 11 species on average (+80% compared with observed data). Similar results were found on the test dataset with the *Bench*, *Ph* and *TrPh* models underpredicting richness by 5 species (-24.9 %) on average whereas the *WhC* model overpredicted richness by 7 species (+35.8% compared with observed data). Similar results were found for models fitted on presence/absence data (Fig. S22).

All models overall underpredicted mean total abundance relative to the train dataset (@fig:chapt1fig3), by 153 individuals for the *Bench* model (-49.8% compared to observed data) and by 159 and 155 individuals (-51.7% and -50.4%) for the *Ph* and *TrPh* models, respectively. The *WhC* model only underpredicted total abundance by 22 individuals (-7.12% compared to observed data). Relative to the test dataset, the *Bench*, the *Ph* and the *TrPh* models overpredicted mean total abundance by 1642 (+234% compared to observations), 465 (+66.3%), and 1969 individuals (+281%), respectively. In contrast, the *WhC* model underpredicted mean total abundance of the test data samples by 404 individuals on average (-57.6%).

Mean beta diversity patterns in the train dataset were overall well captured by all models fitted on abundance or presence/absence data (@fig:chapt1fig3). Observed dissimilarities were slightly overpredicted by all abundance models: by 0.057 for the *Bench* (+7.3% compared with observed data), 0.050 for the *Ph* (+6.4%), 0.054 for the *TrPh* (+6.9%) and 0.070 for the *WhC* models (+8.9%). Differences for presence/absence models were of similar order but all models underpredicted mean pairwise dissimilarities between samples (Fig. S22). On the test dataset, beta diversity patterns were rather poorly captured by the models fitted on abundance data. The Bench model overpredicted the pairwise dissimilarities by 0.364 on average (+67.1% compared with observed data), the *Ph* model by 0.365 (+67.4%), the *TrPh* model by 0.375 (+69.1%) and the *WhC* model by 0.338 (+62.4%). Similar results were observed for presence/absence models with slightly smaller overpredictions (Fig. S22).

![Comparison of model performances with regards to their ability to predict community structures when fitted with abundance data for the train (purple) and test (yellow) dataset. Left: differences in pairwise dissimilarities estimated on the observed and the predicted assemblages. Centre: differences in species richness between observed and predicted assemblages. Right: differences in total abundance between observed and predicted assemblages.](figures/fig3.png){#fig:chapt1fig3}

## Variance partitioning

The mean amount of total variance explained across the 99 polychaetes varied between 21 and 23% for models fitted with presence/absence data and between 18 and 30% for abundance-based models (Fig. S23). For all models, environmental variables, rather than random effects, accounted for most (more than 68% ± 18%; mean ± s.d.) of the explained variance (Fig. S24). However, a larger part of variance is explained by random effects in the *WhC* model compared to the other models, including the Bench (Fig. S24). Compared to the *Bench* model fitted with abundance data, the relative change in the part of variance explained by random effects across the 99 species decreased by 17.00% for the *Ph* model, 10.90% for the *TrPh* model and increased by 224% for the *WhC* model (@fig:chapt1fig4). Similar results with smaller relative changes were obtained across presence/absence models (@fig:chapt1fig4 ; Fig. S23-24).

![Change in explained variance related to environmental predictors (left column) and random effects (right column) for three alternative model structures (yellow for *Phylogeny* (*Ph*), red for *Traits and phylogeny* (*TrPh*), and green for *Whole community* (*WhC*) models) relative to the *Benchmark model* (*Bench*; purple). Percentage changes were computed relative to the *Benchmark model* fitted with presence/absence (top panels) or abundance (bottom panels) data. Positive values indicate an increase in the proportion of variance explained by the focal model compared to the *Benchmark model*. See Figure S23 and S24 for the raw percentages, expressed as percentages of explained variance or total amount of variance respectively.](figures/fig4.png){#fig:chapt1fig4}

## Species niche estimated

For abundance models, the large majority (>60%) of flat response curves indicated a lack of meaningful species-environment relationships (@fig:chapt1fig5). This proportion reached 83% for the *WhC* model. The prevalence of flat relationships did not appear to be related to convergence issues (Fig. S15-16) or to be driven by a specific covariate (Fig. S25). Convex or concave response curves were rare in abundance models. Significant relationships primarily included constant or accelerated declines, representing approximately 10% and 15% of response curves in the *Bench*, *TrPh*, and *Ph* models (@fig:chapt1fig5). In the *WhC* model, these percentages decreased to 7% and 6%, respectively (@fig:chapt1fig5). Similar findings were observed for presence/absence models (Fig. S26; Fig. S27).

![Number (y-axis) and proportion (computed across all coefficients for each model, as indicated above individual bars) of response curves (i.e. one for each species-predictor combination according to the typology (nine shapes highlighted by the black curve in each panel) defined by @Rigal_2020. Results are presented for the different model structures ](figures/fig5.png){#fig:chapt1fig5}

Both abundance and presence/absence *TrPh* models (which include species functional traits) reveal some meaningful trait-environment relationships between the first fuzzy-PCA axis and the seven environmental predictors. This suggests that the occurrence of certain traits is likely favored (or hindered) under certain environmental conditions (Fig. S28). For instance, mobile predatory species showed larger declines in abundance as fetch increases than sessile suspensivores (Fig. S28). Moreover, increase in organic matter concentration and decrease in current velocities were associated with higher abundances of suspensive feeders.

## Exploring the residual correlation

Residual species-species correlations were compared between the *Bench* model and the *WhC* model, only for the 99 target species, using both presence/absence (Fig S29) and abundance data (@fig:chapt1fig6). We only focus this comparison on the *WhC* model (rather than other models) because of its higher predictive performance and higher proportion of explained variance by random effects (@fig:chapt1fig4). Residual correlations estimated from both models were highly correlated, both for presence/absence and abundance data (@fig:chapt1fig6 and Fig. S29). However, agreement between models varied across different random effects from a moderate correlation between residuals associated with the Habitat random effects ($\text{R}^2=0.57$) or with the Site random effects ($\text{R}^2=0.64$), to a high correlation between residuals related to the Year random effects ($\text{R}^2=0.95$). The $\delta$ index main modal distribution, which is centered on zero, confirms an overall agreement between residual correlations estimated from both models in relation to the Year random effects with a marginal proportion of sign changes (0.45% of sign changes related to correlation greater than 0.25; @fig:chapt1fig6 B) only related to low species-species residual correlations (<0.25; @fig:chapt1fig6 A and Fig. S29). In contrast, the $\delta$ index highlights inconsistencies in both magnitude and signs changes between residuals associated with the Habitat and the Site (12.2% and 9.11% of sign changes related to correlation greater than 0.25) random effects. Similar results were obtained for presence/absence models (Fig. S29).

![(A) Comparison of residual species-species correlations associated with the three random effects estimated by the *Whole Community Model* (*WhC*; y-axis) and the *Benchmark model* (*Bench*; x-axis) fitted on abundance data. The colour scale highlights the density of points in each scatter plot. (B) Distribution of the $\delta$ index characterizing change in sign (negative values indicate sign change) and magnitude (higher absolute values indicate higher numerical difference) between residual correlations estimated by the *WhC* model and the *Bench* model adjusted with abundance data for the three random effects (Habitat, Site, Year).](figures/fig6.png){#fig:chapt1fig6}

