# Discussion

It is the norm in ecological case studies to rely on partial data either in terms of spatio-temporal resolution of monitoring data [@Pollock_2020], or in terms of available information related to target species groups (e.g. traits, phylogeny; @Troudet_2017). In this paper we aimed to better understand how the performance of jSDM varies depending on its architecture, and the sources of information considered. jSDMs have two main goals: explaining and predicting species distribution and community composition across space and/or time [@Tredennick_2021]. To date, jSDMs have mostly been tested with regards to their predictive power [@Norberg_2019], and to some extent in terms of parameter estimates [@Wilkinson_2020], but only when fitted on presence-absence data [@Norberg_2019 ; @Wilkinson_2020]. Yet, jSDMs are increasingly fitted on abundance data (e.g. @Brimacombe_2020) and used for explanatory purposes [@Hakkila_2018 ; @Abrego_2016]. Hence, there is currently a mismatch between the knowledge we have regarding the performance of jSDMs and their application by ecologists. Here, we bridged both worlds using complementary metrics and evaluation methods. Overall, we showed that the structure of the model and the sources of information considered do impact models’ performance in many regards (e.g. predictive power, parameter estimates, estimated response curves, community composition). These changes can have significant consequences on the interpretability and the conclusions drawn from these models, especially for ecosystem management policies. 

We found that jSDM’s performance increased when adding information on the 179 accompanying species that were sampled together with the 99 polychaete species of interest. Specifically, the predictive power of abundance-based models was considerably improved. This improvement is likely related to the hierarchical structure of HMSC [@Poggiato_2021] where accompanying species can improve model performance by capturing a combination of “signals” operating at a scale relevant for the target community, and that can be related to the environment, to biotic interactions, or to any other factors (e.g. traits or and evolutionary processes) that can help better describe the realised niche of the species [@Ovaskainen_2017a]. These “signals” are captured by the latent residual correlation matrix that was the feature that made jSDMs so popular at first glance owing to its potential to be used as an indicator for biotic interactions between species. Yet, it is now well-established that the potential biotic signal captured by jSDMs is confounded by other factors including a mismatch between the size of the studied organisms and the environmental variables [@Potter_2013], a too coarse spatial resolution [@Zurell_2018 ; @Konig_2021], or missing environmental variables [@Dormann_2018 ; @Zurell_2018 ; @Blanchet_2020]. Importantly, while including accompanying species improved predictive performance in our case study, this does not mean that accounting for accompanying species is always beneficial. These benefits could indeed vary depending on the quality of the data for accompanying species (e.g. detection issues), their role within the ecosystem (e.g. the case of engineer species having a strong influence on local communities) or the target community considered (e.g. when the target community is mostly under the influence of abiotic factors, then adding other species should not have a large influence on model’s performance). In practice, most studies focus on a certain guild or taxonomic group (e.g. fish, birds) for data collection and/or availability reasons rather than for ecological reasons (availability of traits or phylogeny, consistent sampling methodology). Similarly, our choice to focus on polychaetes was primarily guided by data availability (trait were available from @Boye_2019a), although this is a group characterised by high diversity in terms of lifestyle and functional role [@Jumars_2015 ; @Giangrande_1997]. Hence, most studies typically disregard the role of accompanying species, which may bias model estimation and predictive power according to our results. Further studies, considering a gradual increase in the number of accompanying species, while also potentially accounting for their trophic role or position, would help better understand the effect of non-focal species on jSDM’s performance. While communities and assemblages remain largely defined based on arbitrary choices [@Stroud_2015], such sensitivity analysis could lead to a more objective delineation of the appropriate ecological units to be studied (i.e. which species are necessary to improve model performance? Which group can be studied in isolation?). 

jSDMs have already been used to model the distribution of a wide variety of species ranging from micro-organisms [@Minard_2019 ; @Pichler_2021] to megafauna [@Rocha_2017 ; @Brimacombe_2020] inhabiting many different ecosystems. Here, while we studied communities associated with two typical coastal habitats, i.e. seagrass and sand, that have original characteristics as they are located at the land-sea interface [@Boye_2019a], our case study reflects typical aspects of data in ecological research such as data limitation and data availability but also typical aspects of the functioning and structure of communities (e.g. prevalence of rare and transient species; @Magurran_2003 ; @SnellTaylor_2018). 
Our results provide a few insights on trait-environment relationships but we suspect that trait data quality and availability remains limiting to fully exploit what functional ecology can bring to jSDMs [@Tyler_2012 ; @deJuan_2022]. For instance, we found an interaction between trophic modalities (i.e. microphagous versus macrophagous diet) and fetch (Fig. S15), which indicates that organisms that filter on small particles are less likely to occur in wave-exposed sites where high levels of sediment resuspension can block their filtering systems [@Manning_2014]; conversely macrophagous organisms are less impacted by fetch. Yet, most trait-environment relationships, and most species-environment relationships were flat; a result that could reflect a symptom of the functioning of the system, where neutral processes are expected to dominate (e.g. in seagrass bed communities, @Boye_2019a). However, the lack of contribution of other trait-environment relationships in our model could also be related to a mismatch between trait data, environmental data, and the ecological processes at play. For instance, the physical coastal environment is highly dynamic; a feature that is only partially characterised by our environmental variables that summarise average climatological conditions (but not extreme events or annual/seasonal variability). Likewise, the list of available fuzzy-coded traits only partially captures species capacity to adapt to frequent disturbances or environmental variability [@Violle_2012 ; @deJuan_2022]. Most studies will face the same trade-off between the potential benefit of including traits within jSDMs and the effort needed to collect relevant information. In our case, while including traits did not improve the model's predictive power, it provides knowledge that is useful to understand the response of species along environmental gradients, and set-up management strategies. Hence, if the goal is not prediction but inference [@Tredennick_2021], including traits and proxies of phylogeny might still be useful to interpret the models, provided that explanatory power is not affected (as in our case), and that computation time is not too cumbersome given the added parameters.

Understanding the behaviour of increasingly complex models from a mathematical and ecological point of view is one of the major challenges currently facing numerical ecology and one active research area [@Lucas_2020 ; @Ryo_2021]. jSDMs can be particularly difficult to interpret because the number of parameters drastically increases with the size of the community (the curse of dimensionality; @Tikhonov_2017). Combined with the use of latent variables, auditing this type of model is very complex, and requires a diverse set of metrics [@Wilkinson_2020], notably to understand what is hidden in the signal captured by the residual correlations between species. While guidelines have been developed to characterise the performance of jSDM fitted on occurrence data [@Wilkinson_2020], it is only recently that the predictive power of abundance-based models has been explored @Waldock_2022. Here, we used a set of complementary metrics to assess the performance of both occurrence- and abundance-based models at the species and community levels, the latter considering both alpha and beta diversity. We also transposed a method initially developed for time series [@Rigal_2020] to provide an innovative way of characterising the response curves of each species. Further, we bring together a set of approaches and propose a new index to characterise and compare residual correlations networks. Overall, we provide a comprehensive framework ultimately allowing for an integrative assessment and comparison of jSDM performance.  

As our models performed equally well in terms of explanatory power, it is important to ask whether and to which extent adding extra information is beneficial to jSDM models. Adding accompanying species has two main benefits : increasing predictive power and clarifying species-environment relationships. For the former, while the predictive power was improved by taking the whole community into account, the gain remained small. Hence, if the objective is prediction, machine learning or neural networks applied to community data may provide an interesting alternative to jSDM [@Zhang_2020 ; @Deneu_2021]. Still, jSDMs provide an interesting compromise between predictive power and interpretability [@Norberg_2019 ; @Ovaskainen_2017a] and adding accompanying species could prove a useful strategy for informing conservation through community models [@Pollock_2020]. For the latter, adding accompanying species helped clarify and remove spurious species-environment relationships (many switching from non-linear responses to flat ones). Nonetheless, it is important to keep in mind that the more species you add, the more weight they have in the likelihood and therefore on the estimated species-environment relationships. Thus if the purpose is inference, adding more species may not be the best strategy. Adding trait information or phylogeny seems more appropriate as it leads to more interpretable models. Overall, our results provide new insights into the most appropriate strategies for jSDM fitting, according to the objective of the modelling exercise [@Troudet_2017] and the data at hand. Future work could expand on other ecosystems presenting different characteristics (e.g., with stronger environmental filters or competitive processes) or use simulations [@Zurell_2010] to confirm the generality of our findings.